# MapsMap Hackathon Constructive Criticism

I'll break this criticism into two broad categories: of the prize
funding mechanism, and of the technology tree idea itself.


## Funding Mechanism

I have at this point participated in countless hackathons. I've [slept
under the dinosaurs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tTcNFa78d5w) at
the American Museum of Natural History, won some bounties ([Bluesky
Satellite](https://blueskyweb.org/blog/satellite), [runner up rebuttal
to a Balaji 1729
essay](https://medium.com/@wesc/status-capture-and-institutional-design-e854492152ae)),
have a pending grant on improving IPFS use ([Interplanetary Library
Catalog](https://github.com/filecoin-project/devgrants/issues/400)),
and even [received seed
funding](https://www.brownstoner.com/queens/long-island-city/tech-startup-storybox-makes-its-home-in-lic/)
from a hackathon idea. Point is, I'm no stranger to how these things
work.

As someone who has been very interested in retroactive public goods
funding, open source funding, and prize mechanisms, I thought it would
be a good idea to dive into MapsMap to get a taste of what it would be
like working towards a sizable prize ($30k at the time of
announcement, later upped to $60k).

$60k is very generous. That said, it's in the unfortunate uncanny
valley of seriousness.

- it's great for an ad-hoc team

- it's too small for a professional team if there's a risk they won't
  win

- it's too small to seek funding like teams do with the X-Prize

- it's too big to encourage small experiments

A winning project should require 100+ hours of work, and if there is
only one winner then the majority of projects, including many that
have sunk in 100 hours, net out zero. What's more, the likelihood a
single developer wins is low, especially one who is employed full time
and has family obligations (NB: that's me!).

If there are ten competitive entries (Devpost has over 300 registered
participants as of this writing) and you need at least 100 hours of
work, then that works out to an expected value of $60 / hour, and an
upper end of $600 / hour. A professional developer may instead prefer
to _guarantee_ a dollar rate of $200.

A $60k prize also signals that participants should consider
reorganizing their life. When the deadline was extended by two weeks,
I was on the fence. I welcomed the extra time, but I had also already
pushed myself for a March 1st deadline. A few participants angrily
posted in Discord.

The vast majority of the hours across all submissions going into the
competition is either developing overlapping ideas, or will eventually
be thrown away.

In short, this competition structure is optimizing for ad hoc teams
and produces a large amount of wasted effort, especially if there's
little variation on the desired result: to have a system that edits a
knowledge graph.

If the point in the MapsMap Hackathon is to encourage creativity,
experimentation, and sprout ideas the organizers may not have
considered, then there should be many small prizes, and one large
grand prize.

If the point in the MapsMap Hackathon is to develop a well formed
idea, then MapsMap should just have just hire a professional
development team with the $60k.

Furthermore, it's generally the case that Hackathons are a "young
person's game." If the MapsMap team wants experienced participants,
providing a reasonable space with respect to time commitments is
essential. An intellectually diverse crowd tends to generate better
ideas. Instead, the structure of MapsMap encourages competition, not
cooperation.


## Technology Trees

It's a neat idea. I absolutely love it. However, the major problem is
that the inspiration comes from Civ, a game that has the benefit of
historical 20-20. As Kierkegaard says, life can only be understood
looking backwards, but it must be lived forwards. I suspect that we
can not come up with forward looking maps with a good degree of
accuracy and specificity.

I think the best pro-MapsMap argument is the DARPA funding system,
which relies on program managers with deep knowledge of academia and
industry who can fund technological progress bigger than any
particular research group or company. These plans, though, are
unlikely nodes and edges. Rather, they're imaginative bluesky roadmaps
tethered to existing capabilities and reasoning from first principles.

A popular example within the Foresight community might be Feynman's
_Plenty of Room at the Bottom_, where he reasons his way to
nanotechnology and presents blocking breakthrough challenges. There is
a kind of map here, but it's a very sparsely populated. In fact,
despite it's ambiguity, Feynman's argument is communicated quite
clearly _in a linearly spoken speech_. Where are the nodes and edges?
Rather, _Plenty of Room_ is more like JFK pointing to the moon and
saying "in principle we should be able to get there."

A major -- perhaps _the_ major benefit to having a map is
legibility. There is no compendium of DARPA roadmaps. There should be!
The ability to open up a page and point to a roadmap enables funders
and pioneers to be convinced that a thing might be possible.

Along with legibility also comes a Schelling point that pioneers can
focus towards, like dogs to fire hydrants. Those that embrace focal
points, like animals in nature, are more likely to cooperate and
survive. But I need to ask -- does this necessarily mean these maps
are describing the best solutions we have? Is it the case that the
road to a deep solution can necessarily be written down, or do we risk
derailing progress with overconfident maps?

More often than not, scientific breakthroughs arrive from
unpredictable angles. mRNA vaccines were not on a well accepted map
towards pandemic preparedness. The economic and theoretical
underpinnings of cryptocurrency are decades old, but were not a part
of the web's roadmap until recently (and some argue are still not on
the map). The precision of a good mapping tool needs to be balanced by
epistemic humility, and a structure that accepts exploration of
unseeable territory.
